1 
 
LECTURE NOTES ON COMPUTER NETWORKS (CSC 403) 
1. 
OVERVIEW OF COMPUTER NETWORKS 
A computer network is a system that connects two or more computing devices for transmitting and 
sharing information. The computing devices include everything from a mobile phone to a server. These 
devices are connected with physical cables or by wireless. The first working network, ARPANET, 
created in the 1960s was used to share information among government researchers but the computers 
were large and difficult to move. Today, the Internet is a network of networks that connects billions of 
devices worldwide. Organizations can now setup up networks to connect employees via their devices 
and share resources such as printers both locally and over the internet. Teams are now able to 
collaborate using cloud-based platforms such as Google Drive to share documents with colleagues and 
work remotely. Every form of interaction where people make voice/video calls, stream movies, share 
files, chat with instant messages, or browse the internet all shows that the computer network is at work. 
1.1. Network Devices 
A network device is a piece of hardware or software integral to communication between a computer 
and an internet network. Network devices play two roles. The first is establishing a network 
connection, as a router or a modem does. The second one is maintaining, protecting and enhancing 
that connection, as with a hub, repeater, switch or gateway. Many types of network devices go into 
creating a network. Some are necessary for connections, while others are enhancers. Below is a list 
of network devices that can play a role in enabling your organization to transfer information as 
securely as possible:   
(i) Switches:  
A network switch connects devices within a network (often a local area network) and forwards data 
packets to and from those devices. Unlike a router, a switch only sends data to the single device it is 
intended for (which may be another switch, a router, or a user's computer), not to networks of multiple 
devices. Switches forward data based on the destination MAC address or the IP address. 
(ii) Bridges 
A network bridge is a device that divides a network into segments. Each segment represents a separate 
collision domain, so the number of collisions on the network is reduced. Also, because each collision 
domain has its own separate bandwidth, a bridge also improves the overall network performance. A 
bridge works at the Data link layer (Layer 2) of the OSI model, just like a switch does. It inspects 
2 
 
incoming traffic and decides whether to forward it or filter it. Each incoming Ethernet frame is 
inspected for the destination MAC address. If the bridge determines that the destination host is on 
another segment of the network, it forwards the frame to that segment. 
(iii) Routers  
The router is a physical or virtual internetworking device that is designed to receive, analyze, and 
forward data packets between computer networks. A router examines a destination IP address of a 
given data packet, and it uses the headers and forwarding tables to decide the best way to transfer the 
packets. It is known as an intelligent device as it can calculate the best route to pass the network packets 
from the source to the destination automatically.  
(iv) Firewalls  
A firewall restricts the internet traffic of a private network, controlling what goes in and out. They 
analyze and restrict data packets based on programmed parameters, either whitelists or blacklists. 
Whitelists only allow information that falls within a certain set of parameters, while blacklists deny all 
information that falls inside the parameters. Firewalls are essential for private networks, especially 
those operating with sensitive information. They are also used within internal networks to block access 
between subgroups, such as a sales department being denied access to files pertaining to IT or HR. 
(v) Repeaters 
A repeater is an electronic device that works at the physical layer of the OSI model to amplify a 
received signal. It receives a signal and retransmits it at a higher level or higher power. As a result, the 
signal covers longer distances, sometimes more than 100 meters for standard LAN cables. Repeaters 
are useful for anyone working in a large facility where the Wi-Fi might be spotty in the outer reaches 
of the space. Large office buildings, warehouses, laboratories and campuses are all locations that can 
benefit from repeaters.  
(vi) Gateways 
Gateways connect networks operating on different protocols so data can transfer between destinations. 
These devices normally work at the Transport and Session layers of the OSI model. At the Transport 
layer and above, there are numerous protocols and standards from different vendors, and gateways 
help deal with them. Gateways translate between networking technologies such as Open System 
Interconnection (OSI) and Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP). Because of this, 
gateways connect two or more autonomous networks, each with its own routing algorithms, protocols, 
3 
 
topology, domain name service, and network administration procedures and policies. They perform all 
of the functions of routers and more. In fact, a router with added translation functionality is a gateway.  
(vii) Hubs 
Hubs connect multiple computer networking devices, working only on the Physical layer of the OSI. 
Hubs do not perform packet filtering or addressing functions. Instead, they send data packets to all 
connected devices. A hub also acts as a repeater, amplifying signals that deteriorate after traveling long 
distances over connecting cables. A hub is the most straightforward network connecting device 
because it connects LAN components with identical protocols. A hub can be used with digital and 
analog data, provided its settings are configured to prepare for the formatting of the incoming data. 
For example, if the incoming data is in digital format, the hub must pass it on as packets. But if the 
incoming data is analog, it passes it on in signal form. 
(viii) Modems 
A modem (modulator-demodulator) converts digital signals into analog signals of different frequencies 
and transmits them to a modem at the receiving location. The receiving modem performs the reverse 
transformation and provides a digital output to a device connected to a modem, usually a computer. 
The digital data is usually transferred to or from the modem over a serial line through an industry-
standard interface, RS-232. 
(ix) Network interface cards (NICs) 
A network interface card is an internal hardware chip that connects a device to the internet. At the 
TCP/IP layer, the NIC connects a device to a network. At the physical layer, the NIC transmits a signal 
that sends information to the network layer. Then all data passes through the NIC to the server and 
back to the device. There are two main types of NICs: Ethernet NIC and Wi-Fi NIC. An Ethernet NIC 
comes with an 8P8C socket for connecting an ethernet cable. A Wi-Fi NIC connects to a wireless 
network. Mobile devices have only a wireless NIC, but most computers still incorporate an Ethernet 
chip. Ethernet ports are more reliable but limit a user’s mobility while handling the device.  
(x) Wireless access points (WAPs) 
A wireless access point consists of a transceiver (transmitter and receiver) device used to create a 
wireless LAN (WLAN). WAPs are separate network devices with a built-in antenna, transmitter and 
adapter. WAPs use the wireless infrastructure network mode to provide a connection point between 
WLANs and a wired ethernet LAN. They also have several ports, allowing you to expand the network 
4 
 
to support additional clients. Depending on the size of the network, one or more WAPs might be 
required to provide full coverage. Additional WAPs allow access to more wireless clients and expand 
the wireless network range. Each WAP is limited by its transmission range — the distance a client can 
be from an WAP and still obtain a reasonable signal and data process speed. The distance depends on 
the wireless standard, the obstructions and the environmental conditions between the client and the 
WAP. Higher-end WAPs have high-powered antennas, enabling them to extend how far the wireless 
signal can travel. 
1.2 Types of Computer Networks 
Computer networks can be classified based on several criteria, such as the transmission medium, the 
network size, the topology, and organizational intent. Based on a geographical scale, the different types 
of networks are: 
1. Nanoscale networks: These networks enable communication between minuscule sensors and 
actuators. 
2. Personal area network (PAN): PAN refers to a network used by just one person to connect 
multiple devices, such as laptops to scanners, etc. 
3. Local area network (LAN): The local area network connects devices within a limited 
geographical area, such as schools, hospitals, or office buildings. 
4. Storage area network (SAN): SAN is a dedicated network that facilitates block-level data 
storage. This is used in storage devices such as disk arrays and tape libraries. 
5. Campus area network (CAN): Campus area networks are a collection of interconnected 
LANs. They are used by larger entities such as universities and governments. 
6. Metropolitan area network (MAN): MAN is a large computer network that spans across a 
city. 
7. Wide area network (WAN): Wide area networks cover larger areas such as large cities, states, 
and even countries. 
8. Enterprise private network (EPN): An enterprise private network is a single network that a 
large organization uses to connect its multiple office locations. 
9. Virtual private network (VPN): VPN is an overlay private network stretched on top of a 
public network. 
5 
 
10. Cloud network: Technically, a cloud network is a WAN whose infrastructure is delivered via 
cloud services. 
Based on organizational intent, networks can be classified as: 
1. Intranet: An intranet is a set of networks that are maintained and controlled by a single entity. 
It is generally the most secure type of network, with access to authorized users alone. An 
intranet usually exists behind the router in a local area network. 
2. Internet: The internet (or the internetwork) is a collection of multiple networks connected by 
routers and layered by networking software. This is a global system that connects governments, 
researchers, corporates, the public, and individual computer networks. 
3. Extranet: An extranet is similar to the intranet but with connections to particular external 
networks. It is generally used to share resources with partners, customers, or remote employees. 
4. Darknet: The darknet is an overlay network that runs on the internet and can only be accessed 
by specialized software. It uses unique, customized communication protocols. 
1.3 Key Objectives of Creating and Deploying a Computer Network 
There is no industry—education, retail, finance, tech, government, or healthcare—that can survive 
without well-designed computer networks. The bigger an organization, the more complex the network 
becomes. Before taking on the onerous task of creating and deploying a computer network, here are 
some key objectives that must be considered. 
(i) Resource sharing 
Today’s enterprises are spread across the globe, with critical assets being shared across departments, 
geographies, and time zones. Clients are no more bound by location. A network allows data and 
hardware to be accessible to every pertinent user. This also helps with interdepartmental data 
processing. For example, the marketing team analyzes customer data and product development cycles 
to enable executive decisions at the top level. 
(ii) Resource availability & reliability 
A network ensures that resources are not present in inaccessible silos and are available from multiple 
points. The high reliability comes from the fact that there are usually different supply authorities. 
Important resources must be backed up across multiple machines to be accessible in case of incidents 
such as hardware outages. 
6 
 
(iii) Performance management 
A company’s workload only increases as it grows. When one or more processors are added to the 
network, it improves the system’s overall performance and accommodates this growth. Saving data in 
well-architected databases can drastically improve lookup and fetch times. 
(iv) Cost savings 
Huge mainframe computers are an expensive investment, and it makes more sense to add processors 
at strategic points in the system. This not only improves performance but also saves money. Since it 
enables employees to access information in seconds, networks save operational time, and 
subsequently, costs. Centralized network administration also means that fewer investments need to be 
made for IT support. 
(v) Increased storage capacity 
Network-attached storage devices are a boon for employees who work with high volumes of data. For 
example, every member in the data science team does not need individual data stores for the huge 
number of records they crunch. Centralized repositories get the job done in an even more efficient 
way. With businesses seeing record levels of customer data flowing into their systems, the ability to 
increase storage capacity is necessary in today’s world. 
(vi) Streamlined collaboration & communication 
Networks have a major impact on the day-to-day functioning of a company. Employees can share files, 
view each other’s work, sync their calendars, and exchange ideas more effectively. Every modern 
enterprise runs on internal messaging systems such as Slack for the uninhibited flow of information 
and conversations. However, emails are still the formal mode of communication with clients, partners, 
and vendors. 
(vii) Reduction of errors 
Networks reduce errors by ensuring that all involved parties acquire information from a single source, 
even if they are viewing it from different locations. Backed-up data provides consistency and 
continuity. Standard versions of customer and employee manuals can be made available to a large 
number of people without much hassle. 
(viii) Secured remote access 
7 
 
Computer networks promote flexibility, which is important in uncertain times like now when natural 
disasters and pandemics are ravaging the world. A secure network ensures that users have a safe way 
of accessing and working on sensitive data, even when they’re away from the company premises. 
Mobile handheld devices registered to the network even enable multiple layers of authentication to 
ensure that no bad actors can access the system. 
1.4 Computer Network Management 
Network management is the process of configuring, monitoring, and troubleshooting everything that 
pertains to a network, be it hardware, software, or connections. The five functional areas of network 
management are fault management, configuration management, performance management, security 
management, and (user) accounting management. 
Computer networks can quickly become unruly mammoths if not designed and maintained from the 
beginning. Here are the top 10 practices for proper computer network management. 
(i) Pick the right topology 
Network topology is the pattern or hierarchy in which nodes are connected to each other. The topology 
can speed up, slow down, or even break the network based on the company’s infrastructure and 
requirements. Before setting up a network from scratch, network architects must choose the right one. 
Some common topologies include: 
a) Bus network: Each node is linked to only one other node. 
b) Ring network: Each node is linked to two other nodes, thus forming a ring. 
c) Mesh network: Each node must strive to be connected to every other node in the system. 
d) Star network: A central node server is linked to multiple other nodes. This is faster since data 
doesn’t have to travel through each node. 
e) Tree network: Here, nodes are arranged in hierarchies. 
(ii) Document and update constantly 
Documentation of the network is vital since it is the backbone of operations. The documentation must 
include: 
a) Technical specifications of equipment, including wires, cables, and connectors 
b) Hardware 
8 
 
c) The software used to enable the hardware and the smooth and secure flow of data 
d) Firmware 
e) A formal record of policies and procedures with respect to network operators and users 
This must be audited at scheduled intervals or during rehauls. Not only does this make network 
management easier, but it also allows for smoother compliance audits. 
(iii) Use the right tools 
The network topology is just the first step toward building a robust network. To manage a highly 
available and reliant network, the appropriate tools must be placed at the right locations. Must-have 
tools in a network are: 
a) Network monitoring solutions: A network monitoring solution gives complete visibility into 
the network. Visual maps help gauge network performance. It can track packets, provide a 
granular look into network traffic, and help spot anomalies. Newer monitoring systems 
leverage artificial intelligence to predict scaling requirements and cyber threats using historic 
and real-time data. 
b) Configuration management tools: A network contains many components that interface with 
each other. This results in a lot of configuration parameters to keep track of. Configuration 
management tools resolve this by providing configuration tools that span across the entire 
network. They also allow network managers to ensure that all compliance requirements have 
been fulfilled. 
c) IP address managers: Bigger networks need to have an IP address manager (IPAM) to plan, 
track, and manage information associated with a network’s IP addresses. 
d) Security solutions: Firewalls, content filtering systems, intrusion detection and prevention 
systems—these are all tools that safeguard networks that are carrying increasingly sensitive 
loads. No network is complete without them. However, just acquiring these tools is not enough. 
They must also be properly placed within the network. For example, a firewall must be placed 
at every network junction. Anti-DDoS devices must be placed at the perimeters of the network. 
Load balancers need to be placed at strategic locations based on the infrastructure, such as 
before a cluster of database servers. This must be an explicit part of the network architecture. 
(iv) Establish baseline network & abnormal behaviour 
9 
 
A baseline allows admins to know how the network normally behaves in terms of traffic, user access, 
etc. With an established baseline, alerts can be set up in appropriate places to flag anomalies 
immediately. The normal range of behaviour must be documented at both, user and organizational 
levels. Data required for the baseline can be acquired from routers, switches, firewalls, wireless APs, 
sniffers, and dedicated collectors. 
(v) Protect the network from insider threats 
Firewalls and intrusion prevention systems ensure that bad actors remain out of the network. However, 
insider threats need to be addressed as well, particularly with cybercriminals targeting those with 
access to the network using various social engineering ploys. One way of doing this is to operate on a 
least-privilege model for access management and control. Another is to use stronger authentication 
mechanisms such as single sign-on (SSO) and two-factor authentication (2FA). Besides this, 
employees also need to undergo regular training to deal with security threats. Proper escalation 
processes must be documented and circulated widely. 
(vi) Use multiple vendors for added security 
While it makes sense to stick to one hardware vendor, a diverse range of network security tools is a 
major plus for a large network. Security is a dynamic and ever-involving landscape. Hardware 
advancements are rapid and cyber threats also evolve with them. It is impossible for one vendor to be 
up to date on all threats. Additionally, different intrusion detection solutions use different detection 
algorithms. A good mix of these tools strengthens security; however, you must ensure that they are 
compatible and allow for common logging and interfacing. 
(vii) Segregate the network 
Enterprise networks can become large and clunky. Segregation allows them to be divided into logical 
or functional units, called zones. Segregation is usually done using switches, routers, and virtual LAN 
solutions. One advantage of a segregated network is that it reduces potential damage from a cyberattack 
and keeps critical resources out of harm’s way. Another plus is that it allows for more functional 
classification of networks, such as separating programmer needs from human resources needs. 
(viii) Use centralized logging 
Centralized logs are key to capturing an overall view of the network. Immediate log analysis can help 
the security team flag suspicious logins and IT admin teams to spot overwhelmed systems in the 
network. 
10 
 
(ix) Consider using honeypots & honeynets 
Honeypots are separate systems that appear to have legitimate processes and data but are actually a 
decoy for insider and outsider threats. Any breach of this system does not cause the loss of any real 
data. A honeynet is a fake network segment for the same cause. While this may come at an additional 
cost to the network, it allows the security team to keep an eye out for malicious players and make 
appropriate adjustments. 
 
(x) Automate wherever possible 
New devices are added to systems regularly, and old ones are retired. Users and access controls keep 
changing frequently. All of these must be automated to ensure that human error does not occur and 
there are no vulnerable zombie systems in the network, costing money and security. Automation with 
respect to security is also crucial. It is a good practice to automate responses to attacks, including 
blocking IP addresses, terminating connections, and gathering additional information about attacks. 
2. 
OSI MODEL 
The Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model describes seven layers that computer systems use to 
communicate over a network. It was the first standard model for network communications, adopted by 
all major computer and telecommunication companies in the early 1980s. It has been developed by 
ISO – ‘International Organization for Standardization‘, in the year 1984. The OSI layers “top-down” 
starts from the application layer that directly serves the end user, down to the physical layer. 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 1. OSI Model 
2.1. 
Application Layer 
At the very top of the OSI Reference Model stack of layers, we find the Application layer which is 
implemented by the network applications. These applications produce the data, which has to be 
transferred over the network. This layer also serves as a window for the application services to access 
the network and for displaying the received information to the user. The application layer is used by 
end-user software and applications such as web browsers, skype messenger, and email clients.  
It provides protocols that allow the software to send and receive information and present meaningful 
data to users. A few examples of application layer protocols are the Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP), File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Post Office Protocol (POP), Simple Mail Transfer 
Protocol (SMTP), and Domain Name System (DNS). The Functions of the Application Layer are 
1. Network Virtual Terminal: It allows a user to log on to a remote host. 
2. FTAM- File transfer access and management: This application allows a user to 
access files in a remote host, retrieve files in a remote host and manage or 
control files from a remote computer. 
3. Mail Services: Provide email service. 
4. Directory 
Services: 
This 
application 
provides 
distributed 
database 
sources 
and access to global information about various objects and services. 
12 
 
2.2. 
Presentation Layer 
The presentation layer prepares data for the application layer. It defines how two devices should 
encode, encrypt, and compress data so it is received correctly on the other end. The presentation layer 
takes any data transmitted by the application layer and prepares it for transmission over the session 
layer. The Functions of the Presentation Layer are  
1. Translation: For example, ASCII to EBCDIC. 
2. Encryption/ Decryption: Data encryption translates the data into another form or code. The 
encrypted data is known as the ciphertext and the decrypted data is known as plain text. A key 
value is used for encrypting as well as decrypting data. 
3. Compression: Reduces the number of bits that need to be transmitted on the network. 
Note: Device or Protocol Use:  JPEG, MPEG, GIF 
2.3. 
Session Layer 
This layer is responsible for the establishment of connection, maintenance of sessions, and 
authentication, and also ensures security. The Functions of the Session Layer 
1. Session establishment, maintenance, and termination: The layer allows the two processes to 
establish, use and terminate a connection. 
2. Synchronization: This layer allows a process to add checkpoints that are considered 
synchronization points in the data. These synchronization points help to identify the error so 
that the data is re-synchronized properly, and ends of the messages are not cut prematurely and 
data loss is avoided. 
3. Dialog Controller: The session layer allows two systems to start communication with each 
other in half-duplex or full-duplex. 
Note:  
1. All the below 3 layers (including Session Layer) are integrated as a single layer in the TCP/IP model 
as the “Application Layer”.  
2. Implementation of these 3 layers is done by the network application itself. These are also known 
as Upper Layers or Software Layers.  
3. Device or Protocol Use:  NetBIOS, PPTP 
13 
 
Let us consider a scenario where a user wants to send a message through some Messenger application 
running in his browser. The “Messenger” here acts as the application layer which provides the user 
with an interface to create the data. This message or so-called Data is compressed, encrypted (if any 
secure data), and converted into bits (0’s and 1’s) so that it can be transmitted.   
2.4. 
Transport Layer 
The transport layer provides services to the application layer and takes services from the network layer. 
The data in the transport layer is referred to as Segments. It is responsible for the End to End Delivery 
of the complete message. The transport layer also provides the acknowledgement of the successful 
data transmission and re-transmits the data if an error is found. At the sender’s side: The transport layer 
receives the formatted data from the upper layers, performs Segmentation, and also implements Flow 
& Error control to ensure proper data transmission. It also adds Source and Destination port numbers 
in its header and forwards the segmented data to the Network Layer. The sender needs to know the 
port number associated with the receiver’s application. Generally, this destination port number is 
configured, either by default or manually. For example, when a web application requests a web server, 
it typically uses port number 80, because this is the default port assigned to web applications. Many 
applications have default ports assigned. At the receiver’s side: Transport Layer reads the port number 
from its header and forwards the Data which it has received to the respective application. It also 
performs sequencing and reassembling of the segmented data. The Functions of the Transport Layer  
i. 
Segmentation and Reassembly: This layer accepts the message from the (session) layer, and 
breaks the message into smaller units. Each of the segments produced has a header associated 
with it. The transport layer at the destination station reassembles the message. 
ii. 
Service Point Addressing: To deliver the message to the correct process, the transport layer 
header includes a type of address called service point address or port address. Thus by 
specifying this address, the transport layer makes sure that the message is delivered to the 
correct process. 
Services Provided by Transport Layer: Connection-Oriented Service and Connectionless Service 
1. Connection-Oriented Service: It is a three-phase process that includes: Connection Establishment, 
Data Transfer and Termination/disconnection. 
In this type of transmission, the receiving device sends an acknowledgment, back to the source after a 
packet or group of packets is received. This type of transmission is reliable and secure. 
14 
 
2. Connectionless service: It is a one-phase process and includes Data Transfer. In this type of 
transmission, the receiver does not acknowledge receipt of a packet. This approach allows for much 
faster communication between devices. Connection-oriented service is more reliable than 
connectionless Service. 
Note:   
1. Data in the Transport Layer is called Segments.  
2. Transport layer is operated by the Operating System. It is a part of the OS and communicates with 
the Application Layer by making system calls.  
 
3. The transport layer is called as Heart of the OSI model.  
4. Device or Protocol Use: TCP, UDP  NetBIOS, PPTP 
The transport layer carries out flow control, sending data at a rate that matches the connection speed 
of the receiving device, and error control, checking if data was received incorrectly and if not, 
requesting it again. 
2.5. 
Network Layer 
The network layer has two main functions. One is breaking up segments into network packets, and 
reassembling the packets on the receiving end. The other is routing packets by discovering the best 
path across a physical network. The network layer uses network addresses (typically Internet Protocol 
addresses) to route packets to a destination node. 
The network layer works for the transmission of data from one host to the other located in different 
networks. It also takes care of packet routing i.e. selection of the shortest path to transmit the packet, 
from the number of routes available. The sender & receiver’s IP addresses are placed in the header by 
the network layer. The Functions of the Network Layer are: 
1. Routing: The network layer protocols determine which route is suitable from source to 
destination. This function of the network layer is known as routing. 
2. Logical Addressing: To identify each device on Internetwork uniquely, the network layer 
defines an addressing scheme. The sender & receiver’s IP addresses are placed in the header 
by the network layer. Such an address distinguishes each device uniquely and universally. 
Note:  
1. Segment in the Network layer is referred to as Packet.  
15 
 
2. Network layer is implemented by networking devices such as routers and switches. 
2.6. 
Data Link Layer 
The data link layer is responsible for the node-to-node delivery of the message. The main function of 
this layer is to make sure data transfer is error-free from one node to another, over the physical layer. 
When a packet arrives in a network, it is the responsibility of the DLL to transmit it to the Host using 
its MAC address. The Data Link Layer is divided into two sublayers:   
1. Logical Link Control (LLC) 
2. Media Access Control (MAC) 
The packet received from the Network layer is further divided into frames depending on the frame size 
of the NIC (Network Interface Card). DLL also encapsulates Sender and Receiver’s MAC address in 
the header. The Receiver’s MAC address is obtained by placing an ARP(Address Resolution 
Protocol) request onto the wire asking “Who has that IP address?” and the destination host will reply 
with its MAC address.  The Functions of the Data Link Layer are as follows: 
1. Framing: Framing is a function of the data link layer. It provides a way for a sender to transmit 
a set of bits that are meaningful to the receiver. This can be accomplished by attaching special 
bit patterns to the beginning and end of the frame. 
2. Physical addressing: After creating frames, the Data link layer adds physical addresses (MAC 
addresses) of the sender and/or receiver in the header of each frame. 
3. Error control: The data link layer provides the mechanism of error control in which it detects 
and retransmits damaged or lost frames. 
4. Flow Control: The data rate must be constant on both sides else the data may get corrupted 
thus, flow control coordinates the amount of data that can be sent before receiving an 
acknowledgment. 
5. Access control: When a single communication channel is shared by multiple devices, the 
MAC sub-layer of the data link layer helps to determine which device has control over the 
channel at a given time. 
Note:  
1. Packet in the Data Link layer is referred to as Frame.  
16 
 
2. Data Link layer is handled by the NIC (Network Interface Card) and device drivers of host 
machines.  
3. Switch & Bridge are Data Link Layer devices. 
2.7. 
Physical Layer 
The lowest layer of the OSI reference model is the physical layer. It is responsible for the actual 
physical connection between the devices. The physical layer contains information in the form of bits. It 
is responsible for transmitting individual bits from one node to the next. When receiving data, this 
layer will get the signal received and convert it into 0s and 1s and send them to the Data Link layer, 
which will put the frame back together.  The Functions of the Physical Layer are as follows: 
1. Bit synchronization: The physical layer provides the synchronization of the bits by providing 
a clock. This clock controls both sender and receiver thus providing synchronization at the bit 
level. 
2. Bit rate control: The Physical layer also defines the transmission rate i.e. the number of bits 
sent per second. 
3. Physical topologies: Physical layer specifies how the different, devices/nodes are arranged in 
a network i.e. bus, star, or mesh topology. 
4. Transmission mode: Physical layer also defines how the data flows between the two 
connected devices. The various transmission modes possible are Simplex, half-duplex and full-
duplex. 
Note:  
1. Hub, Repeater, Modem, and Cables are Physical Layer devices. 
2. Network Layer, Data Link Layer, and Physical Layer are also known as Lower 
Layers or Hardware Layers 
The physical layer is responsible for the physical cable or wireless connection between network nodes. 
It defines the connector, the electrical cable or wireless technology connecting the devices, and is 
responsible for the transmission of the raw data, which is simply a series of 0s and 1s while taking care 
of bit rate control. 
 
 
17 
 
Table 1. OSI Model in a Nutshell 
Layer 
No 
Layer Name 
Responsibility 
Information 
Form (Data 
Unit) 
Device or 
Protocol 
7 
Application 
Layer 
Helps in identifying the client and 
synchronizing communication. 
Message 
SMTP 
6 
Presentation 
Layer 
Data from the application layer is 
extracted and manipulated in the 
required format for transmission. 
Message 
JPEG, MPEG, 
GIF 
5 
Session 
Layer 
Establishes Connection, 
Maintenance, Ensures 
Authentication, and Ensures 
security. 
Message 
Gateway 
4 
Transport 
Layer 
Take Service from Network Layer 
and provide it to the Application 
Layer. 
Segment 
Firewall 
3 
Network 
Layer 
Transmission of data from one host 
to another, located in different 
networks. 
Packet 
Router 
2 
Data Link 
Layer 
Node to Node Delivery of Message. Frame 
Switch, 
Bridge 
1 
Physical 
Layer 
Establishing Physical Connections 
between Devices. 
Bits 
Hub, 
Repeater, 
Modem, 
Cables 
 
The modern Internet is not based on OSI but on the simpler TCP/IP model. 
18 
 
 
Figure 2. OSI vs. TCP/IP Model 
The Transfer Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) is older than the OSI model and was created 
by the US Department of Defense (DoD). A key difference between the models is that TCP/IP is 
simpler, collapsing several OSI layers into one: 
1. OSI layers 5, 6, and 7 are combined into one Application Layer in TCP/IP 
2. OSI layers 1, and 2 are combined into one Network Access Layer in TCP/IP – however, TCP/IP 
does not take responsibility for sequencing and acknowledgement functions, leaving these to 
the underlying transport layer. 
Other important differences: 
1. TCP/IP is a functional model designed to solve specific communication problems, and which 
is based on specific, standard protocols. OSI is a generic, protocol-independent model intended 
to describe all forms of network communication. 
2. In TCP/IP, most applications use all the layers, while in OSI simple applications do not use all 
seven layers. Only layers 1, 2 and 3 are mandatory to enable any data communication. 
3. 
NETWORK LAYER 
The network layer or layer 3 of the OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) model is concerned with 
getting packets from the source to destination, routing, error handling and congestion control. 
 
19 
 
3.1 
Function of Network Layer 
The functions of the network layer are: 
3.1.1 Addressing  
Maintains the address at the frame header of both source and destination and performs addressing to 
detect various devices in the network 
3.1.2 Packeting 
This is performed by internet Protocol. The network layer converts the packets from its upper layer 
3.1.3 Routing 
It is the most important functionality. The network layer chooses the most relevant and best path for 
the data transmission from source to destination using a routing algorithm as follows:  
1. In order to transfer the packets from source to the destination, the network layer must determine 
the best router through which packet can be transmitted 
2. Whether the network layer provides datagram service or virtual circuit service, the main job of 
the network layer is to provide the best route. The routing protocol provides this job. 
3. The routing protocol is a routing algorithm that provides that best path from the source to the 
destination. The best path is the path that has the least-cost-path from source to the destination 
4. Routing is the process of forwarding the packets from source to the destination but the best 
route to send the packets is determined by the routing algorithm 
Routing algorithm is divided into two categories: 
1. Adaptive Routing Algorithm 
a. An adaptive routing algorithm is also known as dynamic routing algorithm 
b. This algorithm makes the routing decisions based on the topology and network traffic 
2. Non-Adaptive Routing Algorithm 
a. Non-adaptive routing algorithm is also known as a static routing algorithm 
b. Non-adaptive routing algorithms do not take the routing decision based on the 
network topology or network traffic 
c. Different routing algorithms are: Shortest path algorithm, Distance vector routing, 
link state routing, hierarchical routing. 
